And Andrew for being here.
Uh, with that, I'm happy to pass off to you
to make some general introductory remarks.
Thank you. Time minister.
Um, just to introduce myself to, uh, to everybody,
I'm Andrew Clark, director General of the GCSB.
Uh, with me today is Andrew Hampton,
director General of the SIS.
Uh, we'll both make some opening, uh, statements,
and then we're happy to take questions.
Excellent. Um, this is my first time appearing
before the, uh, committee having taken up the position, uh,
just in October.
Um, thanks for the opportunity
to update you today on the work of the GCSB.
We're New Zealand's lead organization
for signals intelligence and Cybersecurity.
Cybersecurity. We support our customers resilience
and decision making to successfully navigate a disrupted
and contested international environment.
Uh, it is the most challenging global security
environment in a generation.
In recent years, we have observed
a sharp rise in geostrategic competition
and global tensions, including armed conflict,
which has driven supply chain disruption,
global economic uncertainty,
and the erosion of the rules based order that is fundamental
to a small trading nation such as New Zealand.
In this environment, security threats evolve quickly
and cross borders flexibly presenting challenges
for both the bureau and the service.
In the past year, we
provided signals intelligence to customers
and 18 government agencies
and their ministers to equip decision makers
with greater insight.
Our intelligence insights cover the entire range
of national security intelligence priorities
set by the government.
Our second collection is primarily focused offshore,
including our own region, which has been an enduring focus.
The geostrategic competition we see playing out globally.
Uh, we're also witnessing in our neighborhood
and it's our mission to understand what's happening.
At the same time, we are working more closely
with our domestic partners at home, particularly police
and the SIS around counter-terrorism and violent extremism.
In response to the Royal Commission of Inquiry
into the Christchurch terror attacks, over the past year,
our intelligence has helped to disrupt foreign interference
and espionage operations, transnational criminal endeavors,
including drugs, drug smuggling, plus terrorist,
and violent extremist threats.
We also make a significant contribution
to global counter-terrorism efforts, including disruption
of attack planning.
GCSB intelligence plays an important role in ensuring the
safety of New Zealanders offshore,
including deployed members of the New Zealand Defense Force,
some of whom are in conflict zones.
And while I've spoken mainly about our own intelligence
insights, we're also the conduit for partner intelligence
to our decision makers,
and particularly from five i's partners.
I'll now move on to our cybersecurity mission,
which is delivered through the National Cybersecurity
Center Cybersecurity.
Under this function, the GCSB works
to protect information systems critical
to New Zealand's national interests from
sophisticated security threats.
In the last fiscal year,
the NCSC recorded 316 cybersecurity
incidents involving New Zealand's most nationally
significant organizations.
These incidents represent the most serious malicious cyber
activity targeting New Zealand.
This figure is made up
of a slightly higher proportion at 28% of financially
motivated activity.
Then, uh, that with links
to state sponsored cyber actors at 23%,
but broadly in line with previous years,
while criminal groups predominantly target victims
for financial gain through ransomware attacks,
state sponsored cyber actors typically aim
to maintain a covert presence on computer networks
of high intelligence value.
Today, we publicly released information
regarding intrusion into New Zealand's parliamentary
networks by cyber actors sponsored
by the People's Republic of China.
This is the third time in the past year that we have
publicly linked malicious state backed cyber activity
to the PRC, uh, in that same timeframe.
We have also called out the Russian Federation on three
occasions, the type
of state backed techniques we're observing continue
to evolve and test cyber security agencies the world over,
including methods such as, uh, living off the land,
which is the stealthy compromise of critical infrastructure,
using legitimate tools on victim devices
and networks to maintain access
to significant targets without detection.
Our capability to defend New Zealand against these threats
is expanding through the use of new capabilities
and partnerships on top of our Cortex suite of services.
The ncsc Malware Free Networks service provides realtime
detection and disruption delivered through third party
cybersecurity providers,
and it is significantly increasing New Zealand's capability
to disrupt malicious cyber activity.
The number of Kiwis protected by malware free networks,
or MFN as it's now known, continues to grow.
And today, our partnerships
with third party providers in New Zealand mean
that the vast majority of New Zealanders
and New Zealand organizations now have MFN cover.
That's a significant achievement in snowballing in success
in a short time since its formal launch.
In November, 2021,
MFN has disrupted more than 6.2 million
malicious cyber events,
and its positive impact was recognized
with the Public Service Commission's Spirit of service award
and the overall Prime Minister's award last year, uh,
as well as industry recognition
as the best security product award at the annual Information
Security Awards, uh, ICE A NS in 2022.
Overall, our combined cyber defenses have helped mitigate an
estimated $382 million worth of harm
to New Zealand systems since 2016.
Of course, the true value of our national cyber defense, uh,
goes far beyond the dollar figure, uh,
with business continuity, investment confidence
and protection of Kiwi's data at the heart of our service.
In July last year, the government announced the integration
of New Zealand's computer emergency response team
or CERT NZ with the NCSE
to create a single lead operational cybersecurity
agency for New Zealand.
Following the initial transfer of cert functions
to the GCSB, we're now working
to provide a stronger cybersecurity system
and improved customer, uh, service for all New Zealanders.
While the NCSC customers include government departments,
key economic generators, research institutions
and operators of critical national infrastructure
cert supports a broader range of businesses, uh,
organizations and individuals who are affected
by cybersecurity incidents.
cert cybersecurity outreach also goes
beyond our borders Through its Pacific Partnership Program,
CERT works with our close specific neighbors
to build local cybersecurity resilience
by providing advice and support.
As Director General, I'm also the government chief
Information Security Officer, or GCI o.
Last year cabinet confirmed a refreshed GCI o uh, mandate
to strengthen public sector cyber standards
and expand the GCI O mandate beyond the core public service
to include crown agents.
As the cyber threats we face evolve,
so too must the public sector's approach
to addressing those risks
as our critical infrastructure is increasingly digitized.
I would also like to provide an update on the construction
of the $300 million, all
of government data center being built at RNZA base
Auckland for Novi.
The GCSB is the government lead
for information security will operate this facility on
behalf of the broad range
of government agencies that will use it.
The facility will shore up the resilience
of our secure data storage for the next quarter century
workers on track
with the vertical infrastructure taking shape,
and the facility is due to be switched on early next year.
Finally, uh, we are an agency
that must always stay one technological step ahead of those
who would do us harm,
and we need to be alert to what lies around the corner,
which includes risks associated with
emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence
and quantum computing.
That's not something that we can do alone.
Uh, our international partnerships, uh,
and particularly the five eyes are critical to our ability
to adapt quickly.
But our greatest foundation for success lies
with the talented people who make up the GCSB,
their specialist skills
and the diversity of thought that they bring.
They're a slice of New Zealand that enables us to make sense
of the security environment around us.
They, along with many others, have also helped
to build the more robust
and trusted authorizing environment that we now work within.
We are acutely aware that we can only be as effective
as the trust that New Zealanders place in
this, uh, thank you.
I'll now hand over to Andrew.
Thank you, Andrew Koto.
Uh, thank you for the opportunity
to address the committee today.
Next month will mark a year since I became
director General Nzs.
IS It has been a real privilege to lead this organization,
particularly to witness firsthand the kind
of work our people do each day to keep New Zealand
and New Zealanders safe and secure.
Our team is driven by the ethos that we partner
with others for impact.
This will be a key theme of my comments today,
but first, I'll brief you on my agency's insights on the
current threats facing New Zealand
and how we deliver impact through threat detection,
deterrence and disruption.
Countering violent extremism
and terrorism is an enduring priority for us
and continues to occupy around half
of our investigative time with the remainder dominated
by foreign interference in espionage.
New Zealand's national terrorism threat level
currently stands at low.
That means we consider a, an attack
to be a realistic possibility,
but we are not seeing specific attack planning at this time.
To be clear, it does not mean there is no threat.
There is enough bio rhetoric online
to suggest there are people who may have the motivation
to launch an attack,
and there are a small number of nonviolent extremists
who continue to draw a significant investigative resource.
Five years on the Christchurch attacks still cast a long
shadow and continue to inspire
identity motivated violent extremists here and overseas.
But there has also been a range
of positive improvements in the past five years.
In terms of the way Nzsis operates,
there is more emphasis on threat discovery, including
through increased online capability,
much improved interagency collaboration,
and very genuine community engagement.
The memories of the 51 shoe ha are never far from our
thoughts in carrying out this important work.
Across our counter-terrorism function investigative effort
is fairly evenly split between faith identity
and politically motivated groups and individuals.
However, we are seen in emerging trend
where violent extremists are motivated
by highly personalized ideologies with no strong allegiance
to a specific violent extremist cause or group.
Indeed, it is looking like the those with fluid I
ideological convictions could become our most prominent
subjects of investigation.
We're very live to the potential impact
of the conflicts in Gaza and the Red Sea.
Both internationally
and domestically, communities with connections
to the region are feeling both vulnerable and threatened.
And this is compounded by the volume of hate spread online.
We also know that internationally the conflicts are being
used by terrorist organizations
to drive radicalization and recruitment.
There is the possibility
that these conflicts could provide a catalyst
for motivating someone in New Zealand
to undertake an identity politically
or faith motivated attack.
However, we assess the greatest risk domestically,
the spontaneous violence driven
by emotion rather than a terrorist act.
Countering violent extremist threats is a complex challenge,
but it's important that I inform the committee
that there has been successes.
I can't provide specific details in this forum,
but there have been a number
of instances over the past five years where our team working
with others have detected and disrupted terrorist threats.
Threats. The foreign interference in an espionage
environment is equally complex
and fast evolving, driven by geostrategic competition.
Last August, N-Z-S-I-S published an unclassified threat
assessment, which included more detail than we have released
before about the nature of foreign interference
and espionage in New Zealand.
It's been a game changer in terms
of helping make the threat more real
for those potentially affected by this kind of activity.
But we can't just identify the threats.
We are equally focused on helping organize man organizations
manage the risk, including through a range of
publicly available advice.
The annual assessment will be published in August
of this year.
The next one, foreign interference has the potential
to corrode our democratic institutions,
damage our economic prosperity
and compromise New Zealand's safety, security,
and human rights.
In New Zealand, we see state actors
or their proxies seeking
to covertly build long-term influence with individuals.
In our national political environment,
local government is becoming a more common target.
Other business, our business community is increasingly
susceptible to including state sponsored attempts
to steal hard earned intellectual property
or sensitive information.
The monitoring and harassment of ethnic communities
is becoming more sophisticated and even more insidious.
Foreign states like the People's Republic of China
or the Republic of Iran, have always have ways
to make life difficult for those
who dare speak out against those governments.
That's simply unacceptable in a country like New Zealand.
When I reference those countries,
I'm talking specifically about the state
and those who act on its behalf, not the Chinese
or the Iranian people as a whole,
and certainly not community members in New Zealand.
In most cases, there's those very communities we need
to protect at a global level.
New Zealanders have been drawn into a wider PRC strategy
to strengthen the capability
and lethality of its people's republic,
its people's liberation army.
Over the past 18 months,
N-Z-S-I-S has identified seven New Zealand citizens who are
contracted by a third party party to support
military aviation training to the People's Liberation Army.
The training and expertise they were passing on was gained
through previous employment with partner militaries
and with the New Zealand Defense Force.
Such activity clearly poses a major national security risk,
and it is not in New Zealand's interest
to have former military personnel training in other military
who does not share the same values as our own.
I consider it as important that this kind
of activity is called out
after threat mitigation activities by N-Z-S-I-S
and the introduction of legislation in partner countries.
All seven individuals have recently left their training
roles, but the risk remains
that other New Zealanders may be lured
to high salaries to replace them.
Prior to the general election, our agencies worked
with the electoral commission
and other election participants, including political parties
and candidates to increase their awareness of threats
and how to mitigate them.
As New Zealanders would expect
that N-Z-S-I-S conducted proactive threat discovery work
during the period around the general election
to detect signs of foreign interference.
Our assessment is that it's highly unlikely foreign
state activity affected the outcome of the vote.
However, we assessed,
there were almost certainly several foreign states using
the occasion of the election as an opportunity
to conduct long-term influence.
Building the activity we detected was highly likely aimed at
building influence with political candidates
and parties, which is easier to do
during the election period when they are more accessible.
It is also unlikely the election was the target of
any large state backed disinformation campaign,
which is consistent with the nature
of the disinformation environment discussed in our
unclassified assessment.
I know that when we paint a picture
of the threat environment in isolation,
it can look rather bleak.
What is more positive is there is great work,
there is a great deal of work happening, most
of it in concert with others
that is placing us ahead of the thread.
Last October, I stood on a stage in California
with New Zealand's five eyes partners
to warn against the threat of economic espionage.
At the same time, we jointly promoted a set of
secure innovation principles that any organization can use
to protect their precious intellectual property
from those who wish to steal it.
Those principles can apply equally
to any New Zealand innovator as much
as they do to Silicon Valley.
Our work also frequently involves supporting Pacific
partners to build their own national security resilience.
Just this month, our Cook Islands partners put in place
their own protective security policy framework
for government modeled closely on NZ
SI's protective security requirements.
There is a lot we do with the New Zealand public too.
Our guide for identifying signs
of violent extremism reminds is relevant now
as when it was published 16 months ago.
If the public can tell us when they see some
of the behaviors and activities outlined in the guide,
then I have no doubt
that more attack plans will be disruptive
alongside the GCSB.
We have recently published our organizational strategies
for the coming year on our websites.
If we are to continue building deeper partnerships
with a wide range of New Zealanders, it is important
that we are clear about who we are as organizations
and what we seek to achieve for New Zealand.
Uh, nor of course, happy
to take questions. What
Can I say to Andrew And Andrew?
Thank you so much for those introductory remarks.
Um, we'll open it up to the committee in questions.
Now we need to hard stop at, um, 5 55
and I guess the first question, if you don't mind,
I'll just ask around, you know,
obviously acknowledging the public attribution
of malicious cyber activity, uh, Andrew Clark, uh,
today would've become as a bit
of a surprise to New Zealanders.
Um, listening to that, uh, why was it so important, uh,
for us to go public, uh, with that information
and know we've been increasingly doing so, I guess, uh, uh,
in the previous administration
on this administration as well.
Yeah, thanks, prime Minister.
Um, of course, the decision to, uh, to go public is always,
um, one, um, that it's made
by government in the national, uh, interest.
But, uh, increasingly we find ourselves, uh, having to, uh,
speak out, um, in support of rules-based international, uh,
sorry, international, uh, norms of responsible behavior
and international, uh, rules, uh, in this case, um, uh,
there are a large number of countries, uh, that understand
what those international norms
of responsible behavior are in cyberspace.
Uh, and so, uh, what we wanted to do was to link up
with like-minded, uh, partners who are, uh, willing
to speak out in the same time
and space about the same issue of what they're experiencing.
Great. Chris? Yeah, I was interested in, um, your
conversation there around people
with fluid I ideological convictions
and the fact that these individuals could pose greater risk
in the future, particularly
around spontaneous violence driven by emotion.
Does, doesn't that make it harder
to identify who those people are?
Because if there, if,
if there's no particular ideology driving it,
how would we possibly identify them?
Um, um, that's exactly right, Mr.
You know, when you're talking about what we sometimes refer
to as networked terrorist organizations, you know, someone
who may be affiliated with an organization offshore
or even inspired by them,
it's sometimes possible notwithstanding encrypted
communication apps and the like to, to essentially, um,
follow them by following the, the organization.
When you have people shopping around
for different ideologies, that's much harder.
And it's, um, a key key challenge for agencies like ours
because we don't undertake mass surveillance.
So just to let you know, what we do do, um, yes,
we do online operations, we do horizons scanning,
but we also rely really, um,
heavily on the public
because often it's the public who's going
to see someone exhibiting those concerning behaviors
and they'll, they'll be able to alert us.
So that's why we put those indicators out, um,
about a year and a half ago.
So, so I guess, what are the sort of trigger points
that you might see?
So if it is as genuinely spontaneous violence driven
by emotion, I wrote that down
because that kind of alarmed me a little bit.
What would be the things that might tip
someone into that situation?
I think if it's not an ideology,
I, I, I think we've, we've run two things together.
So the, um, first point was around ideological motivation
where yes, we are definitely seeing people shopping around
between different ideologies.
Some common trends are they're quite young,
sometimes they've had quite disrupted upbringings
and are marginalized,
and unfortunately they're obsessed with, with violence.
The point around spontaneous violence, what I was, um,
attempting to convey there is not withstanding, um,
that impact of the war in, in Gaza
and the way in which that has led
to heightened emotions domestically
and led to those communities feeling vulnerable.
We don't get a sense that there's anyone mobilizing
to ideological violence or faith-based violence.
But I guess what we're concerned about,
and certainly our police colleagues are, is
with increased protest, with increased, um,
coming together of, of different groups with opposed views.
There may be spontaneous violence there,
but it wouldn't, that wouldn't meet the threshold of,
of terrorism for us.
So, I'm sorry I was, they were separate points
that I would have run
Together. Just one more for me, 'cause I'm
aware
that there'll be others Wanna ask questions as well.
You, in your conversation of the election, you mentioned
sort of evidence that there were people trying
to build relationships with candidates and parties.
To what extent did you alert the candidates
and parties that that was happening?
Bearing them mind? That's probably the greatest
safeguard against that kind of behavior. Um,
A a again, um, Mr.
Kin, I, I agree completely with what you have said.
You know, when we talk about foreign affairs,
we're not talking about people trying
to build relationships with the mps.
We are not even talking about governments
and open ways trying to influence New Zealand policy.
What we are talking about is behavior that's undertaken in,
in deceptive covert corruptive ways.
So often the person who is the target, indeed,
in most cases, they are unwitting, they may not know
that the person making the donation to them
or the person seeking to meet with them
has an ulterior motive.
So what we do is generally provide briefings
to political parties, to candidates on
what they should look out for.
But there's also been a number
of examples across the political spectrum where we have
identified, um, individuals
who we know are being particularly targeted sometimes
because of their, their ethnicity.
And so we, with full agreement of the political parties,
have worked with those individuals
to help make them more aware of it,
because I do want to stress the majority of,
um, targets are unwitting.
Yeah. And so we need to help, help shine a light on it.
I mean, I guess the thing is, if someone shows up
to a candidate and says, here, I'm here
to give this donation, that
that candidate's not necessarily gonna be in
any position to know whether Yeah.
That person has other connections
that they should be concerned about.
That's exactly it. And you know, from our perspective, one
of the benefits of our electoral system is, um, transparency
around donations.
So that stuff's in the public ar arena,
but sometimes that provides good lead information for us
to dig a dig a bit deeper.
It's also though individuals
who may not be being fully transparent about the nature
of their, their motivation connections.
Yeah. And so us helping to just broaden understanding of, of
that is key, key to managing national look.
The point I want to emphasize is having a
inclusive democratic system is probably our,
our strongest weapon when it comes to countering
national security threats.
We're about encouraging that, not trying to limit it.
Okay. Tiana, I I
Just wanna supplementary, um, you, you talking earlier
that you have some people that are motivated
by violent extremism who are shopping around.
Yeah. So my question is, is where are they,
where are they shopping around?
Is it, is it online?
And if it's online at, at, at, to what extent are you
kind of investigating the way
that the algorithm can amplify this information
and disinformation and push people in?
Yeah. In, in directions
that would not necessarily be the most healthy direction
On, on the first point.
And it very much is online
and we think this is a key drive for it.
It is just much easier for individuals,
particularly marginalized in individuals to be
looking online and finding something
that they have some sort of affinity with.
And moving on to the, to the next one, look,
we aren't the internet place.
Neither is GCP.
It's not our job to monitor
and, um, make determinations about what's, you know,
appropriate online content.
Where we get focused though is
where we see people being mobilized to violence.
So that's where our focus tends to be.
And in a forum like this,
I probably can't talk too openly about it,
but it's often not the stuff
that's published in public forums Mm-Hmm.
Which is the most concern to us.
It's actually getting, getting behind that.
We also find, unfortunately that often it's,
it's not the people who are most vocal online
are the ones who are most concerned.
It's the ones who are quieter
and have, um, the more sophisticated, um, what we call
opsec operational security
are the ones we are concerned about.
I do come back to my point though, you know,
we are not all seen or known and
nor should we be in a democracy like ours.
So having the public equipped, um,
and confident to raise with us concerns they see is key
because they're as likely, if not more likely
to see activity of concern as we
Thanks.
We've just commemorated the fifth anniversary
after, um, uh, you know, the,
the terrorist attacks on the Christchurch must died.
Yeah. Um, a couple of questions just following on from some
of the changes that were put in place in response
to the Royal Commission of Inquiry.
Um, what progress has been made on the stakeholder
or public engagement side of things?
How do you measure that progress? Yeah.
And you mentioned that e ethnic communities are particularly
monitored and the monitoring is becoming
particularly insidious.
How important would resilience work in those communities be?
Okay. Um, first point in terms of responding
to Royal Commission generally, um,
there were only a small number of, um, recommendations
that related specifically to the service.
But one of those was to produce a annual threat assessment,
which we now, now do another, um, was the work
around the indicators
for violent extremism and getting that out there.
So we've, we've progressed those in terms
of community engagement.
Um, and, you know, I need to acknowledge the work
of my predecessor, Rebecca Ridge.
Um, we have developed, um, A series
of networks with a range of faith based
and ethnic community groups.
We meet with them regularly,
sometimes at the director general level, sometimes at a,
at a, um, sort of a community liaison office level
to just hear what they are seeing, hear
what their concerns are.
And a big part of that has actually been building confidence
about what we do and don't do as agencies.
And I, I've really benefited from that
and feel significant progress has been made.
We don't undertake our own surveying of,
of those communities.
And one of the reasons is some of the people who we engage
with, they would rather it not Mm-Hmm.
Not be known that publicly
that we are en engaging with them.
We are very supportive of the ongoing work
that DPMC have done on monitoring community, sentiment on
national security matters,
including with regard to the agency.
So, I, I don't have metrics for you,
but what I can say is, um, the extent
to which community engagement is a focus
for the agency has increased hugely over the
last five years.
And I guess another measure of that is over 20%
of our leads now come from community groups,
which I guess shows confidence.
Yeah. Um, on the point around, um,
general community resilience, couldn't,
couldn't agree, agree more.
And that's obviously a cross, cross government effort.
Just one more. Bye.
May, um, I'll never forget the mum who sort of talked to me
after the attacks happened
and said that she could see
her teenage son being radicalized.
Yeah. And what were the options for deradicalization? Yeah.
Just a question around your point about mitigating threats
from terrorism and violent extremism
and the work that you're doing with other
government agencies.
Does that fit into any of that
Work? Yes. So,
so our agency doesn't have a mandate
or a role specifically to, um, work
with individuals to be be radicalize them.
Um, you know,
and I know there's debate on whether
that's even the appropriate term to, to talk about,
but to help them make better choices.
But we are very supportive of the work
that our police colleagues do, our correction colleagues do,
our Ms d colleagues.
And, you know, sometimes our intelligence can help inform
who they should be, should be, um,
focusing, focusing on.
So yes, we're supportive of that work,
but not in the, not in the lead. Any other questions?
Yeah, I was, um, I was just reflecting on the report
that came out last week, and I,
and I, I think with the attribution that came out today
as well, I think many New Zealanders will be surprised, um,
and, uh, alarmed that, uh, with foreign interference and,
and our, and our national activities and our activities.
And I wanted you to talk a a little bit about the sort
of auditing processes that you have put in place given, uh,
the report that came out last week with a foreign agency
that had marked up somehow.
Um, and, um, and, and, uh, and,
and what you, what you might see as policy settings
that we might need to think about in terms of being able
to provide that comfort for New Zealanders in terms
of those auditing processes you might have.
But we don't take the public, public trust
and confidence for, for granted.
It's fundamental for agencies like ours that the public
understand what we do
and can be assured that we have strong democratic oversight.
Andrew will talk specifically about that, that issue.
But, um,
there has been a transformation over the last 10 years in
terms of oversight in terms of modern legislation,
but also in terms of the systems
and processes within our two agencies
and the culture within the, the agencies.
And I think you just only need to look at the, um,
I just reports over successive years,
which has shown that transformation
Information. Uh, yeah,
I'd, uh, I'd agree.
I would say that the, uh,
the first thing is it shows the value of the work
that the Inspector General does.
Uh, the Inspector General has, uh,
an all access pass across both of our, uh, organizations,
gets to see, uh, read anything.
Um, and, uh,
and in that, uh, report, um, he is
fundamentally, uh, finding
that there were significant systemic issues going back, uh,
to the period where the establishment of that, uh,
that system in New Zealand was, uh,
getting arranged essentially between about 20, uh, 10, uh,
through 2012.
And, um, and turned on in 2013.
Uh, that relates to a period, uh,
that the Kittridge report finds in 2013, uh,
where there were significant systemic issues, uh,
in the GCSB after that period.
That report sets in, uh, in motion a number of lines
of effort that ultimately result in significant legislative
change and increasing the Inspector General's powers
and uplifting the capability within the GCSB, uh, to, uh,
work within, uh, the authorizing environment, uh,
and to provide greater, uh, assurance, uh, to the point
where by 2020, uh,
it is the GCSB bringing, uh, this system, uh, to light
and informing the Inspector General.
And in the Inspector General's, uh, report from last week,
he concludes, uh, that with all of the changes
that have occurred, it would be highly unlikely
that something like that could occur again in
today's authorizing environment.
A question, uh, you, you talked earlier about, uh, support
for, uh, for the Pacific as, as a, as a region.
And I, I wanted to know a little bit, bit,
a little bit more about that in terms of,
'cause Pacific Island countries also have to navigate, uh,
lots of different relationships there.
Uh, what could we do better in terms of helping to support
and independent Pacific
and supporting them to,
to navigate those relationships as well?
Yeah. Okay. Um, part of it is us,
um, being able to share more information with them through,
um, the intelligence that we have access to.
We have insights about what's happening in the region,
which they may not have the benefit of.
So, um, a lot of work that the agencies
are involved with now is getting
that intelligence into a form that we can share it,
but then it's also about providing practical assistance on
what they do to, to mitigate the threats.
And we won't be able to talk about specific examples,
but it's everything from
how we can assist them to get modern, um,
legislative and regulatory frameworks
so they can make better decisions to quite basic things
around how can we, um, how can we just help
them to grow the types of capabilities they need.
But, you know, as I've, um, flagged in,
in the previous session, you know, just last month the
Cook Islands introduced across government, um,
protective security framework, which is very much their own,
but based on the work we, we had done, you know,
you wouldn't have seen something like
that even a few years ago.
Okay. Um, probably just, uh, one final question probably
for me, which is that, um, I note, you know,
quite significantly the improvements in staff attrition over
the last year, um, it's been some good progress there
considering where we were at this time last year.
Um, is that likely to continue
and how you feeling about staff attrition in general?
Um, we are Everyone okay at the back there?
You know, we are, We are, we are very pleased
that we have got over that post
covid shock when both agencies were at like 20% turnover.
Um, we're now tracking much closer to,
to 10, 10%.
Yeah. Um, what we are also though aware of is that,
you know, our agencies have gone through a period
of substantial Yes.
Growth. We are not expecting
that either agency's gonna be growing much in the future.
So we have a real focus on making sure
that we are deploying the staff,
that we've gotten the most effective, um,
and Optim, um, optimal way.
And so, you know, we are being disciplined
around our recruitment at the, at the moment.
Um, having said that,
the agencies are the biggest they've
ever, they've ever been.
We just need to make sure we continue to deliver value
to the public of New Zealand with, um,
the resources that have invested in us.
Great. Judith, I just really wanted to say, um,
thank you for the work you do.
Mm. And tell the teams, um, particularly impressed
with the work that you've done with the Shehar,
that terrible, uh, terrorist attack in Christchurch.
And I was very impressed,
and I think those of us who were there, uh, at the fifth,
um, five year anniversary were so impressed that, uh,
everyone knew you, everyone was able to, um, talk to you
and, uh, they knew actually you're on their
side. So it was great.
Thank you for that, minister. I'll pass it on.
But both of our, both of us are fortunate in
that we lead great teams.
Indeed. Hey, listen, can I say to both of you, thank you
so much, um, for, uh, spending time with us today
and, and answering our questions.
Really appreciate it. With that, uh,
I'll close this public session.
Uh, we'll have a private session wrap up and then we'll.